REVIEWER 1

This paper presents a formalisation in Agda of the Linear Calculus
of Continuations (LCC). The principal contribution of this work is
to show that relying on linear continuations to implement the
state-like behaviour of session types yields several simplifications
in the formalisation of the metaproperties of the language. The main
design choices of the formalisation are as follows. - As mentioned
above, exploiting linear continuations instead of working with
native sessions.  Technically, this intuitively means that at each
interaction, a new continuation is pushed, instead of having to
update the type of the channel where interaction takes place. This
simplifies greatly the handling of typing contexts along the
interactions between processes. - Working with an
intrinsically-typed representation of processes. As a consequence of
that, when formalising the calculus, Section 2.4 is somehow baked
into sections 2.2 and 2.3, so that untyped processes are not
considered at all. In turn, this representation is exploited to
represent Pre-Congruence and Reduction, which involves some
technicalities related to the manipulation of (nameless) channels
and of the context. A good illustration of how things are both
clever and a little intricate at the same time is given by the
explanations of the s-wait and s-fork rules (pages 18-19). - The
process calculus does not have a primitive notion of parallel
composition, but has instead cut, that combines parallel composition
and restriction.

As a result of these design choices, the proofs of several
properties of typed processes turn out to be simple, or even
straightforward in some cases. The cost of this approach is in terms
of readability: the representation of the calculus departs in
several aspects from how things would be phrased naturally when
ignoring the task of formalisation. Nevertheless, the authors make a
very good effort in explaining the formalisation and its
intricacies. The paper is well organised and clear, which makes it
very pleasant to read.

In the concluding sections of the paper, the authors compare their
contribution with existing formalisations of sessions, and show what
can be learnt from this effort. One notable observation is that the
handling of context splitting, which has been the subject of several
investigations, does not seem to cause much problems here. Indeed,
the solution described in Section 3.2 is rather natural, and
apparently does not give rise to complications.

I am in favor of acceptance of this paper.

Below are some suggestions for improvement, that can be taken into
account before publication.

This contribution fits well in the landscape of formalisations of
session types, and is certainly interesting in the context of the
Concurrent Calculi Formalisation Benchmark. Beyond that, do you
think that the approach behind this formalisation can lead to the
development of generic libraries for formal proof, that could be
used to formalise various calculi, including session types and the
linearly typed pi-calculus?

Along the lines of the previous question, one can remark that like
in other works in the field, you adopt a cut rule (739), instead of
treating parallel composition independently from restriction.

This fits well with other design choices made in this work. Could
this formalisation be adapted to handle parallel composition, thus
allowing a more relaxed form of computation (developing further what
you write in 1409-1412)?

The section about related works should be enriched by discussing
existing theorem prover formalisations of linear logic,
independently from the link with session types. It could indeed be
the case that some technical aspects related to the handling of the
typing environment/of hypotheses and of channels/quantifiers are
used in both contexts. Another line of works worth discussing is
Actris/LinearActris, and more broadly Iris formalisations. To what
extend does a proof environment based on separation logic bear some
resemblances to the technical choices you make in this paper?

Typos 111: familiar about -> familiar with 180 "for
modeling.. another channel.": rephrase 211 "=def" clashes with the
line above 353 same structure as 403 "the property... to reduce":
rephase 458 to represents 619 inspired from separation logic 801 We
conclude this module by proving that... 923 comment on a few 953
quantify over them 1278 preserves proves 1424 same type system as CP

REVIEWER 2

A quick last minute note: I ended up writing quite a lot, but to me
the only fix I believed important enough to mark this submission as
"needs revision" is the paragraph that ends in "but I do think some
equivalence result, stated as a theorem, would be very helpful."  I
think as long as that is addressed, all my other comments
nice-to-haves and nothing mandatory nor grave.

-------------

This paper formalizes an alternative process calculus system,
LCC. It supports all the connectives in Wadler's CP (the "basic"
linear logic constructors + first order quantifications + bang). The
authors prove subject reduction + deadlock freedom and mechanize the
system + its proofs in Agda via an intrinsic typing encoding with co
de Bruijn indices.

The paper is generally well-written, and the material is presented
in a mostly gentle manner that makes the high-level details
accessible to non-experts.

The stated contributions/novelties seem to be:

1) Proposing a new calculus that is better suited for mechanization
than CP based on the idea of making continuation channels explicit

2) A mechanization of the system + subject reduction + deadlock
freedom

Overall, the second contribution seems to support the claim given in
the first contribution, given that, according to the authors, the
mechanization is the most complete (most features) and most
streamlined (some metric about code size being short). But also, the
second is a strong contribution in of itself given that most other
process calculus mechanizations omit the deadlock freedom proof.

Since I don't know Agda, I cannot confidently judge the technical
details of section 3 (Agda Formalisation), but the code that was
shown and its discussions seemed to make sense, at least from a
total Agda newbie's perspective. I didn't quite understand the
reason for fine-grained classification of threads/stuck
processes/poised processes in section 3.7, but I'll defer to the
authors (or other reviewers) on whether the section as written would
be satisfactory for readers familiar with Agda.

Regarding the contributions:

1) I found the second contribution to be extremely convincing,
because the mechanization does seem very elegant and also covers the
entire system, as opposed to most mechanizations of session types
that only covers a subset of Wadler's connectives + does not cover
deadlock freedom. The related works give a fantastic overview of the
literature on mechanization of session-typed systems.

My only quip is that authors use file size (after truncation of
spaces/comments) as their attempt to get some understanding of
"complexity" of mechanization. Of course, this is not a literature
review paper on mechanizations, and most other papers use metrics
such as lines of code, which is just as imperfect (actually, lines
of code might be worse as argued by the authors), so it will be
unfair/hypocritical for me to judge this paper from lacking more
in-depth comparisons given that it is not the main point of this
paper.

2) However, I found the first contribution to be less convincing
(but still somewhat convincing) compared to the second
contribution. I think part of it is that the idea of explicit
continuations has been done with SCP, which would be the analog of
LCC, in Sano OOPSLA'23, though it also included separation of
linearity checks. They also cover more metatheory (such as
"adequacy", i.e., the equivalence proof of CP and SCP).  Thus, from
the theoretical perspective, the first contribution, to me, is
actually:

a) extending SCP (minus the linearity predicates) to range over all
of CP, instead of just the simple connectives

b) framing the system as one that is suitable for mechanization in
the broad sense, as opposed to Sano's SCP which was merely a
technical device that they internally used

c) giving evidence that this system (or rather, the insight of
adding explicit continuation bindings) is a good idea when it comes
to mechanization

For me, a is a weak contribution, b is a fairly strong contribution,
and c is somewhere in between. a) is weak because none of the
missing connectives in SCP (bang + quantifiers + additive units)
offer any new challenges to making continuations explicit (I think,
but maybe this can be clarified if there was some complexity that
I'm not seeing). b) is fairly strong because, while it is not
technical, it is a new perspective in the mechanization space. c) is
medium because their only metric is the file size post-truncation. I
think there are many other factors to consider with regards to that
metric, for example, whether duplication of data structure due to
certain abstraction styles can matter.

Also, given that a central point of the first contribution claim is
to propose LCC as an alternative formulation of CP that is better
suited for mechanization, I'd have expected some explicit statement
that discusses the relationship of LCC vs. CP. There are few parts
in the paper that informally mention the translation between LCC
processes and CP processes and the equivalence of them. The
underlying linear logic structure in both systems make them seem, to
me, truly equivalent modulo renaming.

So, is it the case that if P |- \Delta in LCC, [P] |- \Delta in CP
and vice versa (for suitable process translation [P]). Assuming that
is the case, I feel like it is important to state it, because at
least the way I read it, it seemed like an "obviously desirable"
property, and the fact that it is missing in the paper sends some
mixed signals to me. I don't think the exact details of the
translation[P] is that important (though it may be worth sketching
if there is space), but I do think some equivalence result, stated
as a theorem, would be very helpful.

--------------------

Below are minor nitpicks/grammar/formatting issues, which can be
largely ignored. Some of my edits/suggestions are based on me
predicting what the authors were trying to say, so in case the edits
do not make sense for the authors, it could still be useful to know
where readers can potentially misread the paper

49/50: either an an missing before "the need for coinductive..." or
a comma missing somewhere in the list, and I'm not parsing it
correctly

57: session type system -> session-typed system (same in 1269/1270)

57-63: Don't 1 and 2 somewhat contradict each other? I do understand
that calling session endpoints to be linear resources is strictly
about forbidding discarding/duplicating them, but in the naive "use
exactly once" interpretation, the fact that their types are updated
and can be used again seems to be a bit conflicting. Indeed in line
76, this distinction of use exactly once vs use multiple times at
updated types is brought back again, so I think it'll be nice to add
a sentence immediately after 57-62 that clarifies this part.

79: is -> in. Also, I would suggest breaking up this sentence (76 -
81)

81: conversation seems to come out of nowhere... maybe communication
is the more accurate term?

96: [therefore its type can be ... ] [the type of the continuation
channel is ...]  both are ind. clauses. Personally 94-97 should be
broken up, but even if not, [and] should be inserted before
therefore + comma should be inserted between: typing context [comma
here] and the type of

97: is -> in

98-100: awkward/rephrase

105: calculus [comma] and it does so ...

111: about Agda [comma] but we recall ...

122: then moving -> [comma] and then move

144: (table 1, select process term) maybe explicitly state the side
condition on i, e.g., "(where i \in \{ 1,2\})

161: but will -> but we will

229: Table 1. [is the symbol here a typo?]

329: in typing rule for \oplus, I'd make it clear i ranges from 1 -
2 (and the rule name should be \oplus_i I guess, not \oplus

403: inability to reduce: there -> inability to reduce; there

457: PreType n to represents -> to represent

457: scope of n quantifiers [comma] and we use ...

1273: inspired to separation logic -> inspired [by] separation logic
[comma]

1286: and that is -> and is

1419: resources [comma] and there is no need to ...
